



Network Working Group                                  C. Pignataro, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       NC State University
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Rezaki
Expires: 15 June 2024                                              Nokia
                                                             S. Krishnan
                                                                   Cisco
                                                            H. ElBakoury
                                                              Consultant
                                                                A. Clemm
                                                               Futurewei


           Sustainability Considerations for Internetworking
         draft-cparsk-eimpact-sustainability-considerations-01

Abstract

   Abstract Here...

   By definition, an Internet-Draft is a work in progress.  An impactful
   Abstract and Introduction will be added to this working draft pending
   an initial set of reviews of this -00, and after the main sections
   are stable.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.




Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Definition of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  'Sustainable X' versus 'X for Sustainability' . . . . . . . .  12
     3.1.  Sustainable Internetworking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     3.2.  Internetworking for Sustainability  . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   4.  Key Values and Key Value Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   5.  Implications to the IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   6.  Sustainability Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     6.1.  Design Tradeoffs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     6.2.  Multi-Objective Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     6.3.  How Much Resiliency is Really Needed? . . . . . . . . . .  18
     6.4.  How Much are Performance and Quality Compromised? . . . .  18
     6.5.  End-to-End Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     6.6.  The Role of Network Management and Orchestration  . . . .  19
   7.  Sustainability Requirements and Phases  . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.1.  Phase 1: Visibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     7.2.  Phase 2: Insights and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . .  21
     7.3.  Phase 3: Self-optimization and Automation . . . . . . . .  21
   8.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     8.1.  Call to Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Appendix A.  Open issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24


1.  Introduction

   Introduction Here...

   By definition, an Internet-Draft is a work in progress.  An impactful
   Abstract and Introduction will be added to this working draft pending
   an initial set of reviews of this -00, and after the main sections
   are stable.





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


2.  Definition of Terms

   Given that the term 'considerations' is well known within the IETF
   community, it is fair to start by defining 'sustainability'.  The
   1983 UN Commission on Environment and Development had important
   influence on the current use of the term.  The commission's 1987
   report [UNGA42] defines it as development that "meets the needs of
   the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
   meet their own needs".  This in turn involves balancing economic,
   social, and environmental factors.

   This section defines sustainability-specific terms as they are used
   in the document, and as they pertain to environmental impacts.  The
   goal is to provide a common sustainability considerations lexicon for
   network equipment vendors, operators, designers, and architects.

   Notwithstanding the most comprehensive set of definition of relevant
   terms readers can find at [IPCC], this section contributes the
   application and exemplification of the terminology to the
   internetworking domain and field.  The terms are alphabetically
   organized.

   Appropriate technology:
      formerly referred to as 'intermediate technology', it refers to
      technology that is adapted to the local needs of its users, that
      is affordable, sustainable, and usually small scale and
      decentralized.  Globally impactful technology is to be adaptable
      to local contexts it is used in.  Regarding internetworking, there
      could be linkages to centralization / decentralization challenges,
      as well as maintainability & deployability aspects.  Considering
      the diversity of local contexts, from developed countries with
      remote/rural coverage/access issues, to developing countries with
      unstable electricity grids as well as literacy and technology
      usability/accessibility issues, internetworking technology needs
      to be designed, developed and operated according to these local
      requirements, also supporting small scale business models to make
      impact.

   Biodiversity loss:
      Biological diversity is a measure of the abundance and variety of
      life on earth.  Biodiversity loss is the depletion of this
      diversity due to human activity, notably through the destruction
      of natural ecosystems and through the cascading effects of climate
      change, materials extraction, waste disposal and pollution, among
      other impacts, on the living world and species.

   CO2e / CO2eq / CO2-eq:





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      Carbon dioxide equivalent, is the unit for measuring the climate
      change impact of non-CO2 gases as compared to CO2, which is
      selected as a benchmark.

   Carbon awareness:
      is being mindful of the carbon intensity of the electricity being
      used and prioritizing the use of low carbon intensity electricity
      in network set-up and operations.  As carbon intensity is location
      and time dependent, carbon awareness requires dynamic monitoring
      and response, such as carbon aware routing and networking.  This
      is a form of "demand shaping" which aims to match the use of
      energy with the supply of clean energy.

   Carbon intensity (CI):
      is a measure of the carbon-equivalent emission of consumed
      electricity, i.e., grams of carbon-equivalent per kilowatt hour
      (gCO2e/KWh).  When the supplied energy mix is purely from
      renewable sources such as sun and wind, carbon intensity is
      practically 0, when coal and gas-powered electricity generation
      gets in the mix, carbon intensity increases.  Carbon intensity
      could change instantaneously or predictably based on the time and
      location of electricity use.  Prioritizing electricity use when
      carbon intensity is low is a target.

   Carbon offset and credit:
      is a reduction of GHGs from the atmosphere as compensation for
      GHGs produced elsewhere and the credit generated and used
      respectively.  This reduction in GHG emissions can be an increase
      in carbon storage through land restauration, or an actual removal
      of GHG.  For example, certified forestation projects that absorb
      carbon dioxide are producing carbon credits that an airline can
      use to offset its GHG emissions by using (purchasing) these
      credits.  There are accredited carbon trading mechanisms to
      facilitate this exchange.

   Circularity (circular economy):
      is a model or system where material resources and products are
      kept in use for as long as possible through long life cycles,
      reuse, repair, refurbishing and recycling, thereby reducing
      materials use, waste, and pollution as well as biodiversity and
      geodiversity loss.  Keeping internetworking equipment in longer
      use through modularity, serviceability, upgradeability,
      maintainability are strategies to improve circularity.

   Climate change (climate emergency, global warming):
      can be summarized as the increase in the global average
      temperatures and its destructive impact on the interconnected
      systems of the Earth.  The climate emergency refers to the ongoing




Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      and projected impacts of rising global temperatures and the narrow
      time window we have to limit temperature increases to a threshold
      determined by the Paris Climate Agreement (2015) to avoid the
      permanent destabilization of Earth life-support systems.

   Climate change adaptation:
      are the measures we can take to adjust ourselves to the already
      happening and projected future adverse effects of climate change.
      This notably includes raising the resilience of internetworking
      solutions to higher operating temperatures and other impacts of
      climate change, as well as the use of internetworking technology
      to increase the resilience of societies and nature itself.

   Climate change mitigation:
      encompasses all measures to reduce the impact of climate change.
      More specifically, any measures that reduce the amount of GHGs in
      the atmosphere can be considered as climate change mitigation
      through reduced inflow of GHGs into the atmosphere (such as
      burning of fossil fuels) or increasing the impact of carbon sinks
      such as forests and oceans.  Reducing the carbon footprint of
      internetworking and increasing its carbon handprint by helping
      other sectors to decarbonize are mitigation efforts.

   CUE:
      Carbon usage effectiveness [CUE] is a metric that helps determine
      the amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions produced per unit of
      IT energy consumed within a data center.  It provides an effective
      way to measure operational carbon footprint and thus the
      environmental impact of data center operations.  The CUE is the
      ratio of the total CO2 emissions caused by total data center
      energy consumption, divided by the energy consumption of IT
      equipment.  To calculate CUE when using electricity from the grid,
      carbon emissions can be based on published data.  See also "PUE".

   Doughnut economics:
      is a visual framework for sustainable development.  It attempts to
      find a safe operational space within planetary boundaries and
      complementary (yet seemingly opposing) social boundaries, thereby
      meeting the needs of human societies without pushing earth
      environmental boundaries to their tipping points [Doughnut].  The
      significance of this model for interworking is that it
      demonstrates how to conceptualize and position boundaries in our
      designs that are seemingly opposing, to create a balanced
      approach, for example between energy efficiency and performance or
      resiliency and materials efficiency.  It is not one or the other,
      but to find a space where both can be achieved without crossing
      boundaries in respective domains.





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   Energy, power, and their measurement:
      In physics, energy is defined as the capacity or ability to do
      work.  For a system to provide an output, the quantitative
      property of energy is transferred to it.  The energy measurement
      unit in the International System of Units (SI) is the joule (J).
      Power is energy used per second, measured in the International
      System of Units in watts (W), equivalent to the rate of one joule
      per second (J/s).  In other words, energy is the integration of
      power over kime.  As such, Kilowatt-hour (kWh) is also a measure
      of energy, equivalent to 1 kW of power maintained for 1 hour,
      which is equal to 3.6 MJ (million joules).

   Energy efficiency (EE):
      can be summarized as doing the same task with less energy use,
      that is, providing a useful output/impact with as little energy as
      possible, eliminating energy waste.  Switching to more efficient
      power supplies and silicon or developing more efficient
      transmission or signal processing algorithms improve EE.
      Developing energy efficiency metrics for internetworking and
      associated measurement methodologies and conditions as well as
      consistently collecting this data over time are essential to
      demonstrating EE improvements.  While there are various metrics
      that can be defined and used to quantify EE, the key to those is
      to choose outcome-oriented metrics (e.g., energy consumption per
      data volume or traffic unit, in Wh/B [Telefonica].)

   Energy equity:
      Energy equity aims to minimize the negative impacts of our energy
      systems and maximize the benefits for all utility customers.
      Historically, these impacts and benefits haven’t been equitably
      distributed.  Energy equity recognizes that disadvantaged
      communities have been historically marginalized and overburdened
      by pollution, underinvestment in clean energy infrastructure, and
      lack of access to energy efficient housing and transportation.

   Energy proportionality:
      is the correlation between energy used and the associated useful
      output.  For internetworking this is generally interpreted as the
      proportionality of traffic or traffic throughput and energy used.
      This concept is broadly applicable to networking infrastructure,
      data center, and other communication architectures.  It is not a
      given that there is a one-to-one correlation between traffic and
      energy use, notably due to the materially significant idle power
      use by devices, as well as the overall network capacity being
      allocated to serve at times of highest traffic utilization.

   Energy savings / conservation (ES):





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      is the avoidance of energy use, by eliminating a task altogether,
      when possible.  Shutting down unused ports on a networking
      equipment is energy savings/conservation.

   Footprint (environmental/ecological):
      in general terms is the impact we have on the planet.  It can be
      divided into subcategories as carbon footprint, water footprint,
      land footprint, biodiversity footprint, etc.  Related to the
      climate emergency, we are mostly focused on our carbon footprint,
      however, it has been shown that sub-categories of footprint are
      not entirely independent of each other.  For example, our carbon
      footprint has a proven impact on the climate emergency through
      rising global temperatures, cascading significant impact on forest
      cover in warming areas since tree species adapted to certain
      climates vanish, thereby reducing biodiversity in that region, in-
      return impacting the carbon sink properties of the environment and
      exacerbating climate change.  A holistic approach to our
      environmental footprint would therefore provide the best
      opportunity to create impact.

   GHGs:
      Greenhouse gases, are types of gases that trap heat from the sun
      in earth's atmosphere, thereby increasing average global
      temperatures and creating the climate emergency.  Carbon dioxide
      (CO2) is one of the most common (and reference) greenhouse gases.
      There are others such as methane (CH4 - a much more potent GHG
      than CO2) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6 - an artificial electrical
      insulator with tens of thousands of times more warming effect than
      CO2).

   GHG Emissions Scopes:
      According to the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol [GHG-Proto],
      Chapter 4, the emissions scopes are defined as below:

      *  Direct GHG emissions are emissions from sources that are owned
         or controlled by the company.

      *  Indirect GHG emissions are emissions that are a consequence of
         the activities of the company but occur at sources owned or
         controlled by another company.

      The GHG protocol [GHG-Proto], Chapter 4, also includes the
      following descriptions of emissions scopes for accounting and
      reporting purposes:








Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      *  Scope 1 Emissions: Direct GHG emissions - Direct GHG emissions
         occur from sources that are owned or controlled by the company,
         for example, emissions from combustion in owned or controlled
         boilers, furnaces, vehicles, etc.; emissions from chemical
         production in owned or controlled process equipment.

      *  Scope 2 Emissions: Electricity indirect GHG emissions - Scope 2
         accounts for GHG emissions from the generation of purchased
         electricity consumed by the company.  Purchased electricity is
         defined as electricity that is purchased or otherwise brought
         into the organizational boundary of the company.  Scope 2
         emissions physically occur at the facility where electricity is
         generated.

      *  Companies shall separately account for and report on scopes 1
         and 2 at a minimum.

      *  Scope 3 Emissions: Other indirect GHG emissions - Scope 3 is an
         optional reporting category that allows for the treatment of
         all other indirect emissions.  Scope 3 emissions are a
         consequence of the activities of the company, but occur from
         sources not owned or controlled by the company.  Some examples
         of scope 3 activities are extraction and production of
         purchased materials; transportation of purchased fuels; and use
         of sold products and services.

      In telecommunications networks, Scope 3 emissions include the use
      phase of the sold products in operations, and is currently the
      largest part by far, of the whole GHG emissions (Scopes 1, 2 and
      3), depending on the carbon intensity of the energy supply in use.

   GWP:
      Global warming potential, is the potential impact of GHGs on
      climate change, measured in CO2e.

   Geodiversity:
      is the variety of the nonliving parts of nature, that is, the
      materials constituting Earth, including soils, water (rivers,
      lakes, oceans), minerals, landforms and the associated processes
      that form and change them.  The materials used in the production
      of internetworking equipment as well as their manufacturing and
      operational processes themselves, have impact (footprint) on
      geodiversity.  Materials efficiency as well as circularity
      improvements help mitigate this impact.

   Handprint (environmental/ecological):






Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      is a concept developed in contrast to footprint, to quantify and
      demonstrate the positive environmental/ecological impact of
      technologies, products or organizations.  Through a LCA (life
      cycle assessment) approach, the use of a technology or the
      products and services of an organization would have both a
      footprint and handprint usually denoted by the terms "X for
      sustainability" (handprint) and "Sustainable X" (footprint).  What
      is important is that handprint impact does not compensate for
      footprint impact.  They are to be calculated and reported
      independently; footprint to be minimized as much as possible, and
      handprint maximized as much as possible, which are by definition
      different activities anyway.  Otherwise, this might be construed
      as "greenwashing".  A popular seesaw figure in common
      sustainability literature depicting handprint and footprint
      sitting on opposite ends of a seesaw, one going up while the other
      is going down is a misguided representation.

   LCA (Life Cycle Assessment):
      is a comprehensive methodology to measure the environmental impact
      of a product, service, or process over its complete lifecycle,
      from the extraction and procurement of materials, through design,
      manufacturing, distribution, deployment, operations (use),
      maintenance/repair, decommissioning, refurbishment/reuse,
      recycling and disposal (waste), considering the full upstream and
      downstream supply chains as well.  It is an extremely complicated
      process and there are multiple methods used worldwide, which might
      not produce same/similar results.  LCA covers full footprint
      aspects, not only covering carbon, but also materials and
      biodiversity.

   Materials efficiency and reuse:
      is the concept of using less primary and (more) recycled materials
      to provide the same output.  A networking equipment that provides
      the same function with less aluminium used is more materials
      efficient.  Reuse of materials in manufacturing, thereby reducing
      primary materials extraction is a cornerstone of circularity,
      reducing environmental footprint and promoting geodiversity.

   Net-zero:
      in general, is to bring down GHGs as close to zero as possible.
      It is generally recognized that it may not be possible to get GHGs
      to 0 in many contexts and the balance is said to be covered by
      carbon offset.  For example, many organizations and countries have
      net-zero targets by certain dates and typically what they mean is
      that they will reduce their GHGs by more than 90% and the
      remaining up to 10% will be offset.

   PUE:




Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      Power usage effectiveness, is a data centre energy efficiency
      metric.  The PUE is defined by dividing the total amount of power
      entering a data center by the power used solely to run the IT
      equipment within it.  PUE is expressed as a ratio, with the
      overall power usage effectiveneess improving as the quotient
      decreases towards one.  See also "CUE".

   Planetary boundaries:
      is a concept that defines 9 environmental boundaries, if not
      crossed, provides a safe space for humanity to live.  This was
      developed and tracked by the Stockholm Resilience Centre
      [Planet-B].  Their latest report indicates that 6 out of the 9
      boundaries have already been crossed.  This translates to the
      increased risk of irreversible environmental change, the so-called
      tipping points.  Climate change is one of these boundaries,
      represented as carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere (ppm
      by volume) and others are biodiversity loss, land use, fresh
      water, ocean acidification, chemical pollution, ozone depletion
      (one boundary that has been successfully mitigated), atmospheric
      aerosols and biogeochemical (nitrogen in the atmosphere and
      phosphorus in oceans).

   Rebound effect:
      is the reduction in the potential benefits of more efficient
      technologies and solutions to reduce resource use, due to the
      increased demand they might trigger as costs might decrease, in
      return even increasing the overall resource use.  This is known as
      Jevons paradox: efficiency leading to increased demand.  In
      internetworking, this can manifest itself when more energy and
      resource efficient systems reduce the cost for infrastructure
      build and operations and when this is reflected to customers as
      reduced cost, customers respond by increased use of
      telecommunications services which pushes infrastructure build and
      operations upwards, thereby negating the projected gains from
      efficiency measures.  Another descriptive source for this
      phenomenon can be found at [Frontiers].

   Tipping points:














Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      are critical environmental thresholds, which when crossed likely
      lead to irreversible state changes in climate systems that might
      push the overall earth system out of its stable state that
      supports life on Earth.  For example, there are tipping points
      defined for the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets disappearing,
      the Arctic sea-ice loss, Siberian permafrost loss or the dieback
      of the Amazon and Boreal forests.  As planetary boundaries are
      crossed, the likelihood of the tipping points being reached also
      increases.  When the tipping points are hit, notably
      simultaneously, the overall impact to the global Earth system
      might be catastrophic, as another stable state which no longer
      supports life could be reached.

   UN SDGs:  The SDG Academy
      United Nations Sustainable Development Goals are 17 global
      objectives that collectively define a framework for a sustainable
      global system where people and the planet collectively thrive and
      live in peace, prosperity and equity.  They were adopted in 2015
      and most of them have a target achievement date of 2030 [UN-SDG].
      They are part of the so-called UN 2030 Agenda.  The International
      Telecommunications Union (ITU) has published on how our technology
      could help meet the UN SDGs [ITU-ICT-SDG].  Notably, most UN SDGs
      provide guidance for the handprint impact of internetworking
      technologies, while some are also related to potential action for
      footprint reduction.  The 17 SDGs are:

      Goal 1    No poverty
      Goal 2    Zero hunger
      Goal 3    Good health and well-being
      Goal 4    Quality education
      Goal 5    Gender equality
      Goal 6    Clean water and sanitation
      Goal 7    Affordable and clean energy
      Goal 8    Decent work and economic growth
      Goal 9    Industry, innovation and infrastructure
      Goal 10   Reduced inequalities
      Goal 11   Sustainable cities and communities
      Goal 12   Responsible consumption and production
      Goal 13   Climate action
      Goal 14   Life below water
      Goal 15   Life on land
      Goal 16   Peace, justice and strong institutions
      Goal 17   Partnerships for the Goals

      [SDG-Acad] also provides useful information on the topic, as well
      as progress to date.






Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


3.  'Sustainable X' versus 'X for Sustainability'

   Every technology solution, system or process has sustainability
   impacts, as it uses energy and resources and operates in a given
   context to provide a [perceived] useful output.  These impacts could
   be both negative and positive w.r.t sustainability outcomes.  With a
   simplistic view, the negative impact is termed as footprint and the
   positive impact is handprint, as defined in the "Definition of Terms"
   section.  Again, generally speaking, footprint considerations of a
   technology are grouped under "Sustainable X" and the handprint
   considerations are covered under "X for Sustainability".

   Additionally, when sustainability impacts are considered, not only
   environmental but also societal and economic perspectives need to be
   taken into account, both for footprint and handprint domains.  A
   systems perspective ensures that the interactions and feedback loops
   are not forgotten among different sub-areas of sustainability.

   Another fundamental sustainability impact assessment requirement is
   to cover the complete impact of a product, service or process over
   its full lifetime.  Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) starts from the raw
   materials extraction & acquisition phases, and continues with design,
   manufacturing, distribution, deployment, use, maintenance,
   decommissioning, refurbishment/reuse, and ends with end-of-life
   treatment (recycling & waste).  It is imperative that we consider not
   only the design and build stages of our technologies but also its use
   and end-of-life phases.  An equally essential way of ensuring a
   holistic perspective is the supply-chain dimension.  When we consider
   the footprint impact of a technology we are building, we need to
   consider the full supply chain that the technology is part of, both
   upstream, what it inherits from the material acquisition, components
   and services used, to downstream for wherever the technology is used
   and then decommissioned.  Further, this includes transportation of
   materials or products, and the carbon-friendliness of the means and
   routes chosen.  What this implies is that we are responsible for the
   direct and indirect impacts of our activity, both on demand and
   supply directions.

   Below, we cover the "Sustainable Internetworking" and
   "Internetworking for Sustainability" perspectives in more detail.

3.1.  Sustainable Internetworking

   Sustainable internetworking is about ensuring that the negative
   impacts of internetworking are minimized as much as possible.

   In the environmental / ecological sustainability domain, the sub-
   areas to be considered are:




Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   *  Climate change,

   *  materials efficiency, circularity, preservation of geodiversity,
      and

   *  biodiversity preservation.

   Climate change considerations in internetworking by and large
   translate to energy sourcing, consumption, savings and efficiency as
   this impacts the GHGs of the internetworking systems directly, when
   mostly non-renewable energy sources are used for the operations of
   the networks.  When the carbon intensity of the energy supply used in
   operations decreases (more renewable energy in the supply mix), then
   the use phase GHGs also proportionally decrease.  This might put the
   GHG emissions of the manufacturing and materials extraction and
   acquisition phases ahead of the use phase.  These are called the
   embodied emissions.

   However, energy is not the only aspect to consider: materials
   efficiency and circularity are key actions to limit the resource use
   of our technologies, thereby reducing the scarcity of materials but
   also the destruction of many ecosystems during their extraction and
   manufacturing, polluting water and land with waste, which might also
   impact directly or indirectly the abundance and health of the species
   on the planet, namely biodiversity.  While it is significantly more
   difficult to quantify and measure the impact of our technologies in
   these domains, the planetary boundaries framework provides helpful
   guidance.

   For the societal and economic footprint of our technologies, we need
   to be mindful about the potential negative effects of our
   technologies w.r.t. the social boundaries, as depicted in the so-
   called doughnut economics model, that includes education, health,
   incomes, housing, gender equality, social equity, inclusiveness,
   justice and more.  What we need to realize is that our technology has
   direct and indirect impacts in these aspects and the challenge is not
   only to meet environmental sustainability targets but social and
   economic ones as well.  There are very practical considerations, for
   example: are there partial or total barriers to accessing the
   Internet or its services? what is the impact of biases in artificial
   intelligence (AI), as it pertains gender biases, when those AI models
   are used in job selection?  More technology doesn't always mean
   better outcomes for all and can we mitigate this impact?  Admittedly,
   a quantitative approach to the societal and economical aspects is
   more challenging; thinking in terms of profit, people, and planet, as
   well as the KV/KVI approach described below bring some relief.






Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


3.2.  Internetworking for Sustainability

   When it comes to the positive impact of internetworking in tackling
   the sustainability challenges faced, we are in the "internetworking
   for sustainability" realm.  This is a very diverse topic covering
   innumerable industrial and societal verticals and use cases.
   Essentially, we are asking how our technology can help other sectors
   and users to decarbonize, and to reduce their own footprints and to
   increase their handprints in environmental, societal and economic
   dimensions.  These are induced or enablement effects.  Examples are
   how internetworking is being used in smart energy grids or smart
   cities, transport, health care, education, agriculture, manufacturing
   and other verticals.  While efficiency gains are usually a basis,
   there are also other impacts through ubiquitous network coverage,
   sensing, affordability, ease of maintenance and operation, equity in
   access, to name a few.

   Climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation, as defined
   in the "Definition of Terms" section, are particular focus areas
   where internetworking could help create more resilience in our
   societies and economies along with sustainability.

   Essentially, handprint considerations are asking us to think about
   how our technology could be used to tackle sustainability challenges
   at first, and second, to generate feedback on how to create enablers
   and improvements in our technology for it to be more impactful.  The
   usual KPIs related to technical system parameters would be largely
   insufficient for this purpose.  Supporting this effort, Key Values
   (KV) and Key Value Indicators (KVIs) concepts have been developed, to
   be used in conjunction with use cases to develop impactful solutions.
   KV and KVIs are the subject of the nxt section below.

   The following are some examples of internetworking for
   sustainability.  This is not a comprehensive list; many more such
   examples can be found.  Leveraging internetworking for sustainability
   usually involves special requirements, which are listed along with
   the examples.

   *  Smart Grid: The Smart Grid [RFC6272] generally refers to
      enhancements to traditional electrical grids that offer additional
      features such as two-way flows of electricity (e.g., accommodating
      solar panels, electrical batteries) and granular control of the
      grid (e.g., allowing to selectively turn off certain consumers
      such as Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) units
      during certain times.)  The Smart Grid aims to improve
      sustainability by facilitating concepts such as peak shaving
      (i.e., lowering peak usage to reduce the amount of excess
      generation of electricity that is not needed during non-peak



Pignataro, et al.         Expires 15 June 2024                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


      periods), and encouraging residential homes and business to invest
      in renewable energy sources such as solar, for example offering
      credit for feeding surplus energy being generated back into the
      grid.  For this to work, the Smart Grid requires support by
      networking technology that enables the required control loops as
      well as visibility into grid telemetry.  This, in turn, requires
      the support of new requirements, including aspects of security
      (since a critical infrastructure is at stake), adherence to high
      precision service levels and ultra-low latency communication
      (e.g., to mitigate sudden spikes in voltage), and special
      provisions to ensure data privacy (given that data from private
      households, electrical vehicles, and personal devices is
      involved.)

   *  Smart Cities: Many applications for smart cities involve
      optimizations to make cities more sustainable.  Examples include
      smart garbage disposals that reduce the number of truck rolls (and
      associated emissions) to collect garbage only when needed, and
      guidance systems for smart parking that reduce the amount of
      vehicle traffic used to find parking spots.  These applications
      are enabled by networking.  Again, special requirements need to be
      supported for networks to support those applications, such as the
      ability to deploy equipment in harsh urban environments, or
      monitoring for vandalism.

   *  Smart Agriculture: Smart agriculture involves minimizing usage of
      resources such as fertilizer and water in the production of
      agricultural output.  This also helps minimize the area set aside
      for farming and reclaim land for other purposes including
      biodiversity.  Similarly, networking is an enabler for
      environmental sustainability.  Special requirements for
      applications in this space include aspects such as the ability to
      support networking equipment without the need to run power lines
      (e.g., using battery or solar), and support for intermittent
      communications.

4.  Key Values and Key Value Indicators

   In the context of sustainability, key values are what matters to
   societies and to people when it comes to direct and indirect outcomes
   of the use of our technology.  While KPIs help us to build, monitor
   and improve the design and implementation of our technologies, key
   values and their qualitative and quantitative indicators tell us
   about their usefulness and value to society and people.  As we want
   our technology to help tackle the grand challenges of our planet,
   their likelihood of usefulness and impact is a paramount
   consideration.  KVs and KVIs help set our bearings right and also
   demonstrate the impact we could create.  The main idea is shifting
   from measuring performance to measuring value.





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   While key values could be universal, like for example the United
   Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDGs) [UN-SDG], how they
   are measured, or perceived (KVIs) could be context dependent and use
   case specific.  To give a simplified example, UN SDG 3, "good health
   and well-being" is a key value for any society and individual.  Then,
   when we consider the use case of providing health care and wellness
   services in a remote, rural community which doesn't have any
   hospitals or specialist doctors, a key value indicator could be how
   fast a patient could access health care services without having to
   travel out of town, or the successful medical interventions that
   could be carried out remotely.  Then the next step is to identify
   which parts of our technology could help enable this and design our
   technology to create impact for the KVs as per KVIs.  In this case,
   universal network coverage, capacity and features to integrate
   multitude of sensors, low-latency and jitter communication services
   could all be enablers with their own design targets and KPIs defined.
   Subsequently, we would track the KVIs and the KPIs together for
   successful outcomes.

   Admittedly, this might not be a straightforward task to carry out for
   each protocol design.  Yet, such analyses could be included in design
   processes along with use case development, covering a group of
   technology design activities (protocols) together.  There are ongoing
   efforts in mobile networking research to use KVs/KVIs efficiently
   [M6G-SOCIETAL-KV-KVI] [M6G-VALUE-PERF] [Hexa-X_D1.2].

   While we find ourselves trying to optimize seemingly contradicting
   parameters or aspects such as reducing latency and jitter and
   increasing bandwidth and reach targets with sustainability ones like
   reduced energy consumption and increased energy efficiency, key
   values and key value indicators would help keep our eyes on the
   targets that matter for the end users and communities and societies.
   Considerations for such potential design trade-offs, which are at the
   heart of our engineering innovations, is the topic of the next
   section.

4.1.  Key Value Enablers

   Between the design and creation of a technology, and realization of
   the value generated by it, there are a number of enablers and
   blockers of its usage.  We generally refer to them as KV Enablers.
   These are the key factors that would scale and spread use cases, or
   block their deployment.  Beyond technical aspects, there are criteria
   such as level of adaptation to a particular society or ecosystem,
   cost of connectivity and Internet service access, availability of
   services, security and privacy.  An important corollary is that KV
   enablers can be used to drive technological requirements and
   advancements to maximize key value.



Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


5.  Implications to the IETF

   This section describes the implications of sustainability to the
   IETF.  Specifically, the high-level relevant areas on which the IETF
   can act upon, and a rough prioritization.  These potentially include
   use cases, protocols, metrics, etc.

   A key area to understand the relevance and implication is regarding
   IETF Protocols.

6.  Sustainability Considerations

6.1.  Design Tradeoffs

   Traditionally, digital communication networks are optimized for a
   specific set of criteria that proxies for business metrics.  A
   network operator providing services to their customers intends to
   maximize profits, by increasing top-line revenue and decreasing
   bottom-line associated costs.  This directly translates to goals of
   optimizing performance and availability, while reducing various
   costs.

   Most recently, various forces elevate the need for sustainability in
   networking technologies and architectures, to quantify and minimize
   negative environmental impact.

   A first approximation to this conundrum indicates that optimizing
   only network availability (e.g., by having excess capacity and backup
   paths) or optimizing only performance (e.g., by increasing speeds
   selecting paths based on delays only) can be in opposition to
   optimizing sustainability objectives.  For a given application, use-
   case, or vertical realization of technology, a Pareto-efficient
   choise is potentially presented on a win-win of improving
   sustainability without sacrificing availability or performance beyond
   the application tolerance.

   Consequently, network architects and designers are presented with a
   set of new design tradeoffs: a multi-objective optimization that
   satisfies border requirements and global optima for availability,
   performance, and sustainability simultaneously.  This is not unlike
   the doughnut economics model concept introduced in the "Definition of
   Terms" section.

6.2.  Multi-Objective Optimization

   To understand this new model, we can analyze a simplified example.
   Assume the following topology, passing traffic from A to B:




Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


                           A
                           |
                      +----------+
                      | Router 1 |------------+
                      +----------+            |
                       | | | | |         +----------+
                       | | | | |         | Router 3 |
                       | | | | |         +----------+
                      +----------+            |
                      | Router 2 |------------+
                      +----------+
                           |
                           B

       Figure 1: Simplified Network for Multi-Objective Optimization

   Router 1 is directly connected to Router 2 through five parallel
   links, of 10 Gbps each.  Router 1 can also reach Router 2 through
   Router 3 with 40 Gbps links between Router 1 and Router 3, and
   between Router 3 and Router 2.  Let's assume that the capacity-
   planned traffic between A and B equals 15 Gbps.

   In this scenario, a topology optimized for performance and
   availability/resiliency would have all links and routers on, and
   would likely forward traffic using two of the parallel links.
   Utilizing the path through Router 3 might lower performance, but it
   serves as a backup path.

   On the other hand, when we add sustainability as a consideration,
   different options are presented.  One of them is to remove from the
   topology Router 3 and associated links, and shutdown links and optics
   in two or three of the parallel links.  Another option is to
   completely shutdown all the parallel links and route traffic through
   Router 3 (i.e., not maximizing performance alone, but maximizing at
   the time performance, availability and resiliency, and
   sustainability.)  The choice between these two options will depend on
   the aggregate sustainability metrics of network elements in each of
   the two topologies.

   Another option is to use flexible Ethernet, where the five links
   combined are aggregated into one active virtual link which has 15
   Gbps, and another inactive link of 35 Gbps of capacity -- although a
   physical link cannot be half-active and half-inactive as far as PHY
   and optics are concerned.







Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


6.3.  How Much Resiliency is Really Needed?

   When we add sustainability considerations, resiliency is not the
   single objective to optimize.  We can represent a computer network as
   a mathematics graph, in which different nodes and links are selected
   depending on the network and path optimization.  And while the graphs
   of resiliency and sustainability might be impractical to approximate
   with formulas, there are ratios that can give a sense of border
   conditions.

   For example, consider the ratio of overall network capacity (in
   bandwidth, compute power, etc.) over the used network capacity, and
   let's call it "Resiliency Index".  If this number is one, there's no
   resiliency; and as the ratio grows, so potentially unused capacity
   that could be utilized in a failure event.  Similarly, consider the
   values os sustainability metrics for when the Resiliency Index is one
   and for when it is two.  These borders points might give an
   indication of the slope for each objective.

6.4.  How Much are Performance and Quality of Experience Compromised?

   The fields of performance and quality of experience have the benefit
   of significant study and standardization of metrics.  In a similar
   way than with resiliency, a degradation of performance and Quality of
   Service parameters, such as bandwidth, latency, jitter, etc., can
   very well be observed and measured, as a variation of sustainability
   metrics.  The relative slopes of improvement of each goal would hint
   as to where the balance lies.

6.5.  Metrics for Sustainability

   A sustainability quantification framework is paramount for
   understanding the sustainability posture of a system, as well as its
   potential for aid in sustainability outcomes.

6.5.  End-to-End Sustainability

   The networking industry is in the starting phases of addressing this
   objective.  We are seeing a sprinkling of sustainability features
   across the networking stack and components of devices, whether it is
   on forwarding chips, power supplies, optics, or compute.  Many of
   those optimizations and features are typically local in nature, and
   widely scattered across different elements of a network architecture.
   An opportunity for maximizing the positive environmental impact of
   these technologies calls for a more cohesive and complementary view
   that spans the complete product lifecycle for hardware and software,
   as well as how some of these features work in unison.




Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   For example, features that provide energy saving modes for devices
   can be dynamically utilized when the network utilization is such that
   performance would not significantly suffer.  Or consider a core
   router of today that becomes more usable as an edge/access router of
   the future due to the need for higher throughput in the core.  This
   section explores the benefits of macro-optimizations by clustering in
   specific phases, versus micro-optimizing locally without awareness of
   the network context.

6.6.  The Role of Network Management and Orchestration

   Deployment and operational aspects play a critical role in making
   networks more sustainable.  A detailed explanation of that role, the
   associated challenges, as well as an outline of solution approaches
   is provided in [I-D.irtf-nmrg-green-ps].  Here are some areas in
   which network management can help make networks more sustainable; for
   a more extensive treatment, please refer to that document.

   *  Dimensioning: Networks should be deployed and configured with
      sufficient capacity to serve their intended purpose.  At the same
      time, overprovisioning and providing too many resources should be
      avoided, as this results in waste and unnecessary environmental
      impact.  Network management can faciliate proper dimensioning of
      networks by providing the methods and tools that allow to assess
      network usage, determine required capacities, identify trends to
      allow to proactively accommodate traffic growth and new services.












Pignataro, et al.         Expires 15 June 2024                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   *  Network optimization: Network management applications can help
      solve difficult network optimization problems involving multiple
      parameters, multiple and sometimes conflicting objectives, and
      mitigation of tradeoffs.  Network optimization examples include
      maximization of utilization or of aggregate QoE scores,
      minimization of the possibility of SLA violations with a given
      amount of network resources, or optimization of the cost of
      configured paths.  Network metrics related to sustainability are
      another set of parameters that can be optimized.

   *  Rapid Discovery and Provisioning Schemes: One of the biggest
      potential opportunities in reducing environmental impact of
      networks concerns the ability to power resources such as equipment
      or line cards down when they are momentarily not needed due to
      swings in traffic demands.  In general, this involves fully
      automated management control loops with very short time scales.
      Network management can enable such schemes, involving algorithms
      that determine and control the rapid de- and re-commissioning of
      networking resources, as well as the necessary control protocols
      that facilitate aspects such as rapid resource discovery,
      reprovisioning, or reconvergence of management state.

7.  Sustainability Requirements and Phases

   The considerations for sustainability described in the
   "Sustainability Considerations" section and their associated goals
   cannot always be achieved at the same time and we expect the
   following high level phases:

   1.  Visibility: In this phase we focus on the measurement and
       collection of metrics.

   2.  Insights and Recommendations: In this phase we focus on deriving
       insights and providing recommendations that can be acted upon
       manually over large time scales.

   3.  Self-Optimization via Automation: In this phase we build
       awareness into the systems to automatically recognize
       opportunities for improvement and implement them.

7.1.  Phase 1: Visibility

   Visibility represents collecting and organizing data in a standard
   vendor agnostic manner.  The first step in improving our
   environmental impact is to actually measure it in a clear and
   consistent manner.  The IETF, IRTF and the IAB have a long history of
   work in this field, and this has greatly helped with the
   instrumentation of network equipment in collecting metrics for
   network management, performance, and troubleshooting.  On the



Pignataro, et al.         Expires 15 June 2024                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   environmental-impact side though, there has been a proliferation of a
   wide variety of vendor extensions based on these standards.  Without
   a common definition of metrics across the industry and widespread
   adoption we will be left with ill-defined, potentially redundant,
   proprietary, or even contradicting metrics.  Similarly, we also need
   to work on standard telemetry for collecting these metrics so that
   interoperability can be achieved in multi-vendor networks.








Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


7.2.  Phase 2: Insights and Recommendations

   Once the metrics have been collected, categorized, and aggregated in
   a common format, it would be straightforward to visualize these
   metrics and allow consumers to draw insights into their GHG and
   energy impact.  The visualizations could take the form of high-level
   dashboards that provide aggregate metrics and potentially some form
   of maturity continuum.  We think this can be accomplished using
   reference implementations of the standards developed in "Phase 1:
   Visibility".  We do expect vendors and other open projects to
   customize this and incorporate specific features.  This will allow
   identifying sources of environmental impact and address any potential
   issues through operational changes, creation of best-practices, and
   changes towards a greener, more environmentally friendly equipment,
   software, platforms, applications, and protocols.

7.3.  Phase 3: Self-optimization and Automation

   Manually making changes as mentioned in "Phase 2: Insights and
   Recommendations" works for changes needed on large timescales but
   does not scale to improvements on smaller scales (i.e., it is
   impractical in many levels for an operator to be looking at a
   dashboard monitoring usage and making changes in real-time 24x7).
   There is a need to provision some amount of self-awareness into the
   network itself, at various layers, so that it can recognize
   opportunities for improvement and make those changes and measure the
   effects by closing the loop.  The goals of the consumers can be
   stated in a declarative fashion, and the networks can continually use
   mechanisms such as ML/DL/AI with an additional goal to optimize for
   improvements in the environmental impact.  These include, for
   example:

   *  Discovery and advertisement of networking characteristics that
      have either direct or indirect environmental impact,

   *  greener networking protocols that can move traffic on to more
      energy efficient paths, directing topological graphs to optimize
      environmental impacts, and

   *  protocols that can instruct equipment to move under-utilized links
      and devices into low-energy modes.

7.3.1.  Cycle of Phases

   The three phases run in an iterative fashion, such that after phases
   1, 2, and 3 are completed for an interation, there will be an added
   awareness of what (else) to collect back to phase 1.




Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   Further, sustainability-aware self-optimization is something to
   explore in Autonomic Networking.

8.  Conclusion

   The pre-eminent message in this document is to elevate the need and
   sense of urgency of including sustainability considerations in our
   protocol and system design, and to provide editors with
   sustainability lexicon, definitions, and priorities to carry out that
   task.  As an added benefit, by including sustainability
   considerations, it will be possible to optimize for not only
   performance parameters but also sustainability ones, through
   respective trade-offs in our protocols and systems.

   We also envision that on top of minimizing the environmental impact
   of our technologies and helping consumers identify and reduce the
   environmental impact of their use, we can also make a positive impact
   on other less-traditionally and non-Internet technologies as well as
   non-technologies.  E.g., use our technologies to choose greener and
   more efficient sources of power, control HVAC systems efficiently,
   etc.  We are looking forward to our efforts that will positively
   impact the environment using Internet technologies and protocols.

8.1.  Call to Action

   INSERT specific call to action here.

9.  Security Considerations

   TBC.

10.  Acknowledgements

   TBC.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

11.2.  Informative References

   [CUE]      Belady, C., Azevedo, D., Patterson, M., Pouchet, J., and
              R. Tipley, "Carbon Usage Effectiveness (CUE): A Green Grid
              Data Center Sustainability Metric", 2 December 2010,
              <https://www.thegreengrid.org/en/resources/library-and-
              tools/241-Carbon-Usage-Effectiveness-%28CUE%29%3A-A-Green-
              Grid-Data-Center-Sustainability-Metric>.




Pignataro, et al.         Expires 11 June 2024                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   [Doughnut] Wikipedia, "Doughnut (economic model)", 13 October 2023,
              <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doughnut_(economic_model)>.




Pignataro, et al.         Expires 15 June 2024                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   [Frontiers]
              Frontiers, "The Rebound Effect and the Jevons' Paradox:
              Beyond the Conventional Wisdom", 2023,
              <https://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics/6598/the-
              rebound-effect-and-the-jevons-paradox-beyond-the-
              conventional-wisdom#overview>.

   [GHG-Proto]
              "The Greenhouse Gas Protocol - A Corporate Accounting and
              Reporting Standard, revised version", Geneva: World
              Business Council for Sustainable Development, Washington,
              DC: World Resources Institute, 2004,
              <https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/
              ghg-protocol-revised.pdf>.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-green-ps]
              Clemm, A., Westphal, C., Tantsura, J., Ciavaglia, L., and
              M. Odini, "Challenges and Opportunities in Management for
              Green Networking", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-irtf-nmrg-green-ps-01, 23 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-nmrg-
              green-ps-01>.
   [Hexa-X_D1.2]
              "Expanded 6G vision, use cases and societal values -
              including aspects of sustainability, security and
              spectrum", Deliverable D1.2, 30 April 2021, <https://hexa-
              x.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Hexa-X_D1.2.pdf>.

   [IPCC]     "Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2022).
              Annex I: Glossary. In Global Warming of 1.5°C: IPCC
              Special Report on Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5°C above
              Pre-industrial Levels in Context of Strengthening Response
              to Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to
              Eradicate Poverty (pp. 541-562)", Cambridge University
              Press, doi 10.1017/9781009157940.008, 2022,
              <https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/glossary/>.

   [ITU-ICT-SDG]
              ITU, "Digital technologies to achieve the UN SDGs", 2023,
              <https://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/
              icts-to-achieve-the-united-nations-sustainable-
              development-goals.aspx>.

   [M6G-SOCIETAL-KV-KVI]
              Wikström, G., Schuler Scott, A., Mesogiti, I., Stoica, R.,
              Georgiev, G., Barmpounakis, S., Gavras, A., Demestichas,
              P., Hamon, M., Hallingby, H., and D. Lund, "What societal
              values will 6G address?", 17 May 2022,
              <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6557534>.

   [M6G-VP]   Ziegler, V. and S. Yrjola, "6G Indicators of Value and
              Performance", 4 May 2020,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/6GSUMMIT49458.2020.9083885>.





Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   [M6G-VALUE-PERF]
              Ziegler, V. and S. Yrjola, "6G Indicators of Value and
              Performance", 4 May 2020,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/6GSUMMIT49458.2020.9083885>.

   [Planet-B] Azote for Stockholm Resilience Centre, based on analysis
              in Richardson et al 2023, "Planetary boundaries", 2023,
              <https://www.stockholmresilience.org/research/planetary-
              boundaries.html>.

   [RFC6272]  Baker, F. and D. Meyer, "Internet Protocols for the Smart
              Grid", RFC 6272, DOI 10.17487/RFC6272, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6272>.

   [SDG-Acad] "SDG Academy", 2023, <https://sdgacademy.org>.

   [Telefonica]
              Telefonica, "Consolidated Annual Report 2021", 2021,
              <https://statics.telefonica.com/en/financial-reports/2021/
              Consolidated-Annual-
              Report/#i7111116644124bd299d124820baf28f7_394>.

   [UN-SDG]   "Sustainable Development, the 17 Goals", 2023,
              <https://sdgs.un.org/goals>.

   [UNGA42]   UN, "Report of the World Commission on Environment and
              Development : "Our common future"", 4 August 1987,
              <http://digitallibrary.un.org/record/139811>.

Appendix A.  Open issues

   [ISSUE 1]  Complete "Abstract"

   [ISSUE 2]  Complete "Introduction"

   [ISSUE 3]  Shall the 'Definition of Terms' be moved into its own
              document to be cited by all e-impact-related documents?

   [ISSUE 4]  Finalize Call-to-Action in the Conclusion

   [ISSUE 5]  Complete and strengthen the "Implications to the IETF"
              section, Ali and Carlos

Authors' Addresses

   Carlos Pignataro (editor)
   North Carolina State University
   United States of America
   Email: cpignata@gmail.com, cmpignat@ncsu.edu







Internet-Draft        Sustainability Considerations        December 2023


   Ali Rezaki
   Nokia
   Germany
   Email: ali.rezaki@nokia.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: sureshk@cisco.com


   Hesham ElBakoury
   Independent Consultant
   Email: helbakoury@gmail.com






























