



Network Working Group                                  C. Pignataro, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       NC State University
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Rezaki
Expires: 9 November 2024                                           Nokia
                                                             S. Krishnan
                                                                   Cisco
                                                                J. Arkko
                                                                Ericsson
                                                              8 May 2024


     Architectural Considerations for Environmental Sustainability
         draft-pignataro-enviro-sustainability-architecture-00

Abstract

   This document describes several of the design tradeoffs for trying to
   optimize for sustainability along with the other common networking
   metrics such as performance and availability.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 November 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.




Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Architectural Considerations of Environmental
           Sustainability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     2.1.  Design Tradeoffs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Multi-Objective Optimization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.3.  How Much Resiliency is Really Needed? . . . . . . . . . .   4
       2.3.1.  Redundancy and Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.4.  How Much are Performance and Quality of Experience
           Compromised?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.5.  End-to-End Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.6.  Attributional and Consequential Models  . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.7.  The Role of Network Management and Orchestration  . . . .   7
       2.7.1.  Metrics for Sustainability  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   3.  Sustainability Requirements and Phases  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.1.  Phase 1: Visibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.2.  Phase 2: Insights and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Phase 3: Self-optimization and Automation . . . . . . . .   9
       3.3.1.  Cycle of Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   Over the past decade, there has been increased awareness of the
   environmental sustainability impact produced by the widespread
   adoption of the Internet and internetworking technologies.  The
   impact of Internet technologies has been overwhelmingly positive over
   the past years (e.g., providing alternatives to travel, enabling
   remote and hybrid work, enabling technology-based endangered species
   conservation, etc.), and there is still room for improvement.

   This document describes some of the tradeoffs that could be involved
   while optimizing for sustainability in addition to or in lieu of
   traditional metrics such as performance or availability.  Further, it
   discusses how Internet technologies can be used to help other fields
   become more sustainable.

   Specifically, this document details environmental sustainability
   implications to Internet protocols, architectures, and technologies.

2.  Architectural Considerations of Environmental Sustainability






Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


2.1.  Design Tradeoffs

   Traditionally, digital communication networks are optimized for a
   specific set of criteria that proxies for business metrics.  A
   network operator providing services to their customers intends to
   maximize profits, by increasing top-line revenue and decreasing
   bottom-line associated costs.  This directly translates to goals of
   optimizing performance and availability, while reducing various
   costs.

   Most recently, various forces elevate the need for sustainability in
   networking technologies and architectures, to quantify and minimize
   negative environmental impact.

   Optimizing only network availability (e.g., by having excess capacity
   and backup paths) or optimizing only performance (e.g., by increasing
   speeds selecting paths based on delays only) can seemengly be in
   opposition to optimizing sustainability objectives.  For a given
   application, use-case, or vertical realization of technology, a
   Pareto-efficient choice can potentially improve sustainability
   without sacrificing availability or performance beyond the
   application tolerance.  That is, a win-win.

   Consequently, network architects and designers are presented with a
   set of new design tradeoffs: a multi-objective optimization that
   satisfies border requirements and global optima for availability,
   performance, and sustainability simultaneously.  This is not unlike
   the doughnut economics model concept described in [Doughnut].

2.2.  Multi-Objective Optimization

   To understand this new model, we can analyze a simplified example.
   Assume the following topology, passing traffic from A to B:

                           A
                           |
                      +----------+
                      | Router 1 |------------+
                      +----------+            |
                       | | | | |         +----------+
                       | | | | |         | Router 3 |
                       | | | | |         +----------+
                      +----------+            |
                      | Router 2 |------------+
                      +----------+
                           |
                           B




Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


       Figure 1: Simplified Network for Multi-Objective Optimization

   Router 1 is directly connected to Router 2 through five parallel
   links, of 10 Gbps each.  Router 1 can also reach Router 2 through
   Router 3 with 40 Gbps links between Router 1 and Router 3, and
   between Router 3 and Router 2.  Let's assume that the capacity-
   planned traffic between A and B equals 15 Gbps.

   In this scenario, a topology optimized for performance and
   availability/resiliency would have all links and routers on, and
   would likely forward traffic using two of the parallel links.
   Utilizing the path through Router 3 might lower performance, but it
   serves as a backup path.

   On the other hand, when we add sustainability as a consideration,
   different options are presented.  One of them is to remove from the
   topology Router 3 and associated links, and shutdown links and optics
   in two or three of the parallel links.  Another option is to
   completely shutdown all the parallel links and route traffic through
   Router 3 (i.e., not maximizing performance alone, but maximizing at
   the time performance, availability and resiliency, and
   sustainability.)  The choice between these two options will depend on
   the aggregate sustainability metrics of network elements in each of
   the two topologies.

   Another option is to use flexible Ethernet, where the five links
   combined are aggregated into one active virtual link which has 15
   Gbps, and another inactive link of 35 Gbps of capacity -- although a
   physical link cannot be half-active and half-inactive as far as PHY
   and optics are concerned.

2.3.  How Much Resiliency is Really Needed?

   When we add sustainability considerations, resiliency is not the
   single objective to optimize.

   There are many methods to improve network resiliency, including a
   design eliminating single-points-of-failure, performing software
   safe-release selections and upgrades, deploying network real-time
   testing systems (including operations, administration, and
   maintenance (OAM) tools, monitoring systems (e.g., [RFC8403]), chaos-
   based testing, and site reliability engineering (SRE) principles),
   and utilizing redundancy across network elements as well as across a
   topology.  Each one of these methods incurs also a sustainability
   cost.  Yet, the functions for resiliency improvement and
   sustainability cost for each of these methods are not the same.
   Considering sustainability means quantifying its impact in the
   decision of how to improve resiliency, and how much is needed.



Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


2.3.1.  Redundancy and Sustainability

   Let's first explore redundancy.  For example, consider the ratio of
   overall network capacity (in bandwidth, compute power, etc.) over the
   used network capacity, and let's call it "Redundancy Index".  If this
   number is one, there's no redundancy; and as the ratio grows, so does
   the potentially unused capacity that could be utilized in a failure
   event.  Similarly, consider the values of sustainability metrics for
   when the Redundancy Index is one and for when it is two.  These
   border points might give an indication of the slope for each
   objective function.

   Adequate Redundancy:
      In order to determine how much redundancy needs to be built into
      the overall network capacity, which can be referred to as
      "adequate redundancy to avoid network outings", it will be
      important to (1) measure the bandwidth of attacks against the
      overall network capacity; and (2) understand how quickly "high
      bandwidth" attacks can be detected and diverted.  Measuring these
      results over time may lead the "adequate redundancy" to become
      higher over time.

   Justified Redundancy:
      Traditionally, network operators would be much less worried about
      energy use than about the possibility that the network would have
      brownout or backout outages - thus the measuring will help better
      balance the "adequate redundancy" against the related energy use,
      resulting in turn in "justified redundancy": a balance between
      costs and benefits, with energy use as well as material use as a
      clear cost factor.

   Please note that "justified redundancy" may be higher than "adequate
   redundancy" when we manage to organize the redundancy in a multi-
   layer fashion: (1) capacity that is "always on" and always uses
   energy; (2) capacity that can turn on quickly when needed; (and
   possibly (3) capacity that is "on the shelf" (even in the box) but
   ready to be deployed quickly when needed.)

2.4.  How Much are Performance and Quality of Experience Compromised?

   The fields of performance and quality of experience have the benefit
   of significant study and standardization of metrics.  As with
   resiliency, a degradation of performance and Quality of Service
   parameters, such as bandwidth, latency, jitter, etc., can be observed
   and measured, as a variation of sustainability metrics.  The relative
   slopes of improvement of each goal would hint as to where the balance
   lies.




Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


2.5.  End-to-End Sustainability

   The networking industry is in the starting phases of addressing this
   objective.  We are seeing a sprinkling of sustainability features
   across the networking stack and components of devices, whether it is
   on forwarding chips, power supplies, optics, and compute.  Many of
   those optimizations and features are typically local in nature, and
   widely scattered across different elements of a network architecture.
   An opportunity for maximizing the positive environmental impact of
   these technologies calls for a more cohesive and complementary view
   that spans the complete product lifecycle for hardware and software,
   as well as how some of these features work in unison.

   For example, features that provide energy saving modes for devices
   can be dynamically managed when the network utilization is such that
   performance would not significantly suffer.  A core router, instead
   of becoming obsolete due to the need for higher throughput in the
   core, could become a future edge/access router.  That is an example
   of reuse and repurpose, before recycling.  There are benefits of
   macro-optimizations by clustering in specific features, versus micro-
   optimizing locally without awareness of the network context.

2.6.  Attributional and Consequential Models

   Many of the subtleties and nuances of the measurement of GHG and
   environmental impacts stem from the very important distinction
   between attributional and consequential models.  Detailed definitions
   can be found at [UNEP-LCA].

   Attributional:
      Also referred to as Allocational models, start by allocating or
      attributing quantities (e.g., GHG emissions) to entities (e.g., a
      router, a building, a town), and performing comparisons between
      the measurements (or estimates) of the quantity by the entities.

   Consequential:
      Perform the measurement of the quantity by establishing a baseline
      scenario (e.g., before feature introduction) and a modified
      scenario (e.g., after the feature introduction).

   While both models are quite different, they do use the same terms and
   frames of references, measures, and language.  Without explicit
   clarifications, they are prone to confusion.

   For example, measuring the carbon footprint attributed to a batch
   process or a workload based on its energy efficiency would not
   consider that the hardware is still there running.  When is it most
   effective to charge battery-powered devices, during the night when



Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


   there's less load, or during the day when there's solar energy?  In
   other words, if a person who commutes by train to their office five
   days a week starts working from home two days a week, there could be
   an attributional reduction of GHG emissions, yet the train still
   continues running equally.  However, if that person commutes by
   combustion-engine car alone, the consequences are different.

   Considering the attributional versus consequential distinction, there
   are some implications and a potential corollaries:

   *  For an environmental-impact analysis, it is critical to explicitly
      cite the model used, as well as clearly define the boundary.

   *  The activities that we embark upon as internetworking and protocol
      designers - including the ones targeting reduction of negative
      environmental impacts - have an energy footprint of themselves.

   *  "Do no harm" in the context of improving sustainability of
      networks is to look beyond bounded attributions and consider (both
      intended and unintended) consequences.

2.7.  The Role of Network Management and Orchestration

   Deployment and operational aspects play a critical role in making
   networks more sustainable.  A detailed explanation of that role, the
   associated challenges, as well as an outline of solution approaches
   is provided in [I-D.irtf-nmrg-green-ps].  Here are some areas in
   which network management can help make networks more sustainable; for
   a more extensive treatment, please refer to that document.

   Dimensioning:
      Networks should be deployed and configured with sufficient
      capacity to serve their intended purpose.  At the same time,
      overprovisioning and providing too many resources should be
      avoided, as this results in waste and unnecessary environmental
      impact.  Network management can facilitate proper dimensioning of
      networks by providing the methods and tools that allow to assess
      network usage, determine required capacities, identify trends to
      allow to proactively accommodate traffic growth and new services.

   Network Optimization:










Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


      Network management applications can help solve difficult network
      optimization problems involving multiple parameters, multiple and
      sometimes conflicting objectives, and mitigation of tradeoffs.
      Network optimization examples include maximization of utilization
      or of aggregate QoE scores, minimization of the possibility of SLA
      violations with a given amount of network resources, or
      optimization of the cost of configured paths.  Network metrics
      related to sustainability are another set of parameters that can
      be optimized.

   Rapid Discovery and Provisioning Schemes:
      One of the biggest potential opportunities in reducing
      environmental impact of networks concerns the ability to power
      resources such as equipment or line cards down when they are
      momentarily not needed due to swings in traffic demands.  In
      general, this involves fully automated management control loops
      with very short time scales.  Network management can enable such
      schemes, involving algorithms that determine and control the rapid
      de- and re-commissioning of networking resources, as well as the
      necessary control protocols that facilitate aspects such as rapid
      resource discovery, reprovisioning, or reconvergence of management
      state.

2.7.1.  Metrics for Sustainability

   A sustainability quantification framework is paramount for
   understanding the sustainability posture of a system, as well as its
   potential for aid in sustainability outcomes.

3.  Sustainability Requirements and Phases

   The architectural considerations for environmental sustainability
   cannot always be achieved at the same time and we expect the
   following high level phases:

   1.  Visibility: In this phase we focus on the measurement and
       collection of metrics.

   2.  Insights and Recommendations: In this phase we focus on deriving
       insights and providing recommendations that can be acted upon
       manually over large time scales.

   3.  Self-Optimization via Automation: In this phase we build
       awareness into the systems to automatically recognize
       opportunities for improvement and implement them.






Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


3.1.  Phase 1: Visibility

   Visibility represents collecting and organizing data in a standard
   vendor agnostic manner.  The first step in improving our
   environmental impact is to actually measure it in a clear and
   consistent manner.  The IETF, IRTF and the IAB have a long history of
   work in this field, and this has greatly helped with the
   instrumentation of network equipment in collecting metrics for
   network management, performance, and troubleshooting.  On the
   environmental-impact side though, there has been a proliferation of a
   wide variety of vendor extensions based on these standards.  Without
   a common definition of metrics across the industry and widespread
   adoption we will be left with ill-defined, potentially redundant,
   proprietary, or even contradicting metrics.  Similarly, we also need
   to work on standard telemetry for collecting these metrics so that
   interoperability can be achieved in multi-vendor networks.

3.2.  Phase 2: Insights and Recommendations

   Once the metrics have been collected, categorized, and aggregated in
   a common format, it would be straightforward to visualize these
   metrics and allow consumers to draw insights into their GHG and
   energy impact.  The visualizations could take the form of high-level
   dashboards that provide aggregate metrics and potentially some form
   of maturity continuum.  We think this can be accomplished using
   reference implementations of the standards developed in "Phase 1:
   Visibility".  We do expect vendors and other open projects to
   customize this and incorporate specific features.  This will allow
   identifying sources of environmental impact and address any potential
   issues through operational changes, creation of best-practices, and
   changes towards a greener, more environmentally friendly equipment,
   software, platforms, applications, and protocols.

3.3.  Phase 3: Self-optimization and Automation

   Manually making changes as mentioned in "Phase 2: Insights and
   Recommendations" works for changes needed on large timescales but
   does not scale to improvements on smaller scales (i.e., it is
   impractical in many levels for an operator to be looking at a
   dashboard monitoring usage and making changes in real-time 24x7).
   There is a need to provision some amount of self-awareness into the
   network itself, at various layers, so that it can recognize
   opportunities for improvement and make those changes and measure the
   effects by closing the loop.  The goals of the consumers can be
   stated in a declarative fashion, and the networks can continually use
   mechanisms such as machine learning (ML), deep learning (DL), and
   artificial intelligence (AI) with an additional goal to optimize for
   improvements in the environmental impact.  These include, for



Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


   example:

   *  Discovery and advertisement of networking characteristics that
      have either direct or indirect environmental impact,

   *  greener networking protocols that can move traffic onto more
      energy efficient paths, directing topological graphs to optimize
      environmental impacts, and

   *  protocols that can instruct equipment to move under-utilized links
      and devices into low-energy modes.

3.3.1.  Cycle of Phases

   The three phases run in an iterative fashion, such that after phases
   1, 2, and 3 are completed for an interation, there will be an added
   awareness of what (else) to collect back to phase 1.

   Further, sustainability-aware self-optimization is something to
   explore in Autonomic Networking.

4.  Security Considerations

   Sustainable practices offer many environmental, economic, and social
   benefits, and security is a route to sustainability rather than a
   hurdle to clear.

      The creation of sustainability features for an element or a system
      should not weaken or compromise their security posture, nor should
      it increase the surface of attack or create attack vectors.

      -  Sustainability metrics and data models ought to describe how to
         secure the sustainability data exposed and surfaced through
         telemetry.

      -  Sustainability control capabilities, as for example for power
         management, should consider potential attacks leveraging those
         controls.  Setting a device on low-power or power-save modes
         during peak traffic can be a denial-of-service attack vector,
         negatively impacting end-to-end services.

      The development of security features should, in turn, balance the
      environmental impact and sustainability considerations detailed in
      this document.







Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


      -  Computational increase on cryptographic operations can result
         in higher power use.  Since generally the increase of energy
         required is not linear with the increase of computational
         complexity, there's a desire to satisfy security requirements
         while minimizing environmental impact.

      -  Proof-of-Work schemes' and AI models' energy consumption also
         grows non-linearly as a function of the precision achieved.  In
         these, perfect is the enemy of good, and bounding precision
         through specifications supports sustainable compute
         considerations.

5.  Acknowledgements

   This document is created greatly leveraging ideas and text from
   [I-D.cparsk-eimpact-sustainability-considerations], and consequently
   acknowledges all the many contributions that improved it.

6.  Informative References

   [Doughnut] Wikipedia, "Doughnut (economic model)", 13 October 2023,
              <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doughnut_(economic_model)>.

   [I-D.cparsk-eimpact-sustainability-considerations]
              Pignataro, C., Rezaki, A., Krishnan, S., ElBakoury, H.,
              and A. Clemm, "Sustainability Considerations for
              Internetworking", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              cparsk-eimpact-sustainability-considerations-07, 24
              January 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-cparsk-eimpact-sustainability-considerations-07>.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-green-ps]
              Clemm, A., Westphal, C., Tantsura, J., Ciavaglia, L.,
              Pignataro, C., and M. Odini, "Challenges and Opportunities
              in Management for Green Networking", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-nmrg-green-ps-02, 30 December
              2023, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-
              nmrg-green-ps-02>.

   [RFC8403]  Geib, R., Ed., Filsfils, C., Pignataro, C., Ed., and N.
              Kumar, "A Scalable and Topology-Aware MPLS Data-Plane
              Monitoring System", RFC 8403, DOI 10.17487/RFC8403, July
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8403>.








Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Sustainability Arch Considerations           May 2024


   [UNEP-LCA] "Global guidance principles for life cycle assessment
              databases : a basis for greener processes and products",
              2011, <https://www.lifecycleinitiative.org/library/global-
              guidance-principles-for-lca-databases-a-basis-for-greener-
              processes-and-products/>.

Authors' Addresses

   Carlos Pignataro (editor)
   North Carolina State University
   United States of America
   Email: cpignata@gmail.com, cmpignat@ncsu.edu


   Ali Rezaki
   Nokia
   Germany
   Email: ali.rezaki@nokia.com


   Suresh Krishnan
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: sureshk@cisco.com


   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com






















Pignataro, et al.        Expires 9 November 2024               [Page 12]
